and there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night.
An angel of the Lord appeared to them in the glory of the Lord, shown around them, and they were terrified.
But the angel said to them, do not be afraid.
I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all the people.
Today in the town of David, a Savior has been born to you.
He is the Messiah, the Lord.
This will be assigned to you.
You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.
Suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest heaven and on earth, peace to those on whom his favor rests.
When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherd said to one another, Let's go to Bethlehem to see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about.
So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph and the baby who was lying in the manger.
When they had seen him, they spread word concerning what had been told them about this child and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherd said to them.
But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.
The shepherds returned glorifying and praising God for all the things they had seen and heard, which were just as they had been told.
This is the word of the Lord.
Good evening.
And thank you, Tyler.
It's really lovely to be here.
It's an honour to have been asked to speak.
I've really enjoyed getting to know Tyler in the last few years and visiting here when we're in Portland.
And it's very special now because a year ago
Nick and I are our little community of churches in the UK joined 24-7 prayer network and family and so it's just great to all be in that wonderful organization together and to have family all over the world.
It's also great to have been asked to
speak on angels because I've never spoken on angels before, so that's been fun preparing for that.
So we're starting the season of Advent today, the time when we actually celebrate waiting, celebrate waiting for the arrival of God incarnate, God the Son who comes in the flesh, who humbles himself to come to earth as a tiny baby
vulnerable, dependent, potentially completely unrecognizable as the glorious son of a glorious father who lives and reigns from on high over all the earth.
We wait for the birth.
We wait for Christmas.
We anticipate in expectation all that's to come.
And we get glimmers of light and hope as if the dawn is about to break.
God is coming.
He's on his way.
And when he comes, heaven is going to be released onto the earth.
As Mary prophesies, he's brought down rulers from their thrones, but has lifted up the humble.
He's filled the hungry with good things, but has sent the rich away empty.
And Zechariah's song confirms this, justice, righteousness, mercy, forgiveness, and peace are coming.
In Advent, we share in and feel the longing for the end to darkness, to oppression, to imprisonment and slavery.
God is coming.
And angels amazingly play a crucial part in heralding this glorious news that God is coming.
There are angels all over the story of Jesus' birth, especially in Luke's gospel.
It's the angel Gabriel who appears to Zechariah to tell him that he's going to have a son
called John.
It's also Gabriel who appears to Mary to tell her that she too will have a son, only this time in and through the power of the Holy Spirit, who's going to come upon Mary so that she conceives even though she's still a virgin.
And in our story that we heard today, the baby's been born to Mary and the first people, the very first people to hear about the birth
In the whole world are shepherds, humble shepherds with apparently no connection to the royal family, tending their sheep in the field in the middle of the night, taking turns staying awake because this is the time when wild animals would come and steal the sheep, lions, bears, wolves, jackals.
And is there there among the sheep alert to possible dangers?
An amazing thing happens.
An angel appears.
The shepherds here first from one angel, like Zachariah and Mary.
One angel appears.
And what's interesting is that Luke tells us that the glory of the Lord shines around them, around the shepherds.
The glory of the Lord is already in folding them just when one angel appears.
The effect of the glory of God shining around them is that they fear with great fear.
They're truly frightened.
It seems that the manifestation of God's glory pretty much always just leads to fear, not primarily joy and worship.
The worship and the joy follow
once the human creatures have established that they're not being visited for some dreadful reason.
But as always, even though the human creatures feel fearful in the presence of God's glory, they're reassured.
The angel reassures them and says to them, don't fear.
For behold, I bring you good news of great joy, which will lead to all the people.
For today, a Savior has been born to you.
who is Christ the Lord.
They don't need to fear.
The angel isn't here to judge or to punish, but to announce good news of great joy, the Savior, who is the Messiah has been born to them.
And if you notice, the angel doesn't actually tell them to go and see the baby, but the instruction is implicit in the proclamation
This will be the sign when you go, which you will.
You'll find a baby wrapped in swaddling cloths and lying in a manger.
You will go and see him.
And then suddenly something else happens, something more.
The word suddenly doesn't occur very often in the New Testament.
It comes up again on the road to Damascus when suddenly a light from heaven flashes around Saul.
And here suddenly
out of nowhere a great company of the heavenly host appears with the angel praising God and saying, glory to God in the highest heaven and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.
They weren't there and then they were there suddenly.
How many of them?
We don't really know.
But this is a heavenly host.
So how many is a heavenly host?
Well, again, we don't really know.
But early readers of this text imagined thousands and thousands.
Probably because they had read Revelation 5, 11, then I looked and heard the voice of many angels numbering thousands upon thousands and 10,000 times 10,000.
They encircled the throne and the living creatures and the elders.
So if there are tens of thousands in heaven, what happens when they suddenly come to earth to announce the greatest news of all time, of all history, possibly thousands and thousands, all proclaiming, and then they're gone.
Then the angels leave them.
They go back into heaven and the shepherds hurry off.
to find Mary, Joseph, and the baby.
We might think it's strange that they come to Shepherds first, but the idea of God choosing a herder of sheep isn't alien to God's people who know the story of Moses and David.
When God chooses a shepherd, a herder of sheep to do his bidding,
God's people are coming into a new freedom.
I love the fact that they hurry off.
They don't even think about their sheep because something massive has happened.
Once they've seen the little family, they spread the word themselves.
They go out.
The good news, they tell to all around them and everybody is amazed
The shepherds then are the first witnesses to the Savior, the first proclaimers of the good news, the first evangelists, following in the steps of the angels who first announced the good news to them.
And they too glorify and praise God for everything they've heard and seen.
They join in with the heavenly host, glorifying and praising God.
It's an amazing story.
But why angels?
Why are angels involved and what's their significance?
Some people like to think about water angels and we don't really know in many ways and it's an interesting question but tonight I don't want to think about water angels particularly but why angels?
What's the purpose of God creating and employing these beings, both in relation to himself and in relation to us?
In other words, what do they tell us about God and how he's chosen to do things in his creation?
And what do they tell us about us?
Angels are a given in the Bible, whether we find them easy or difficult to believe in.
They exist.
We don't have time to go through a list of all the angels in the Bible, but let me just give you a brief summary of some of the angels referenced in the New Testament.
Angels are primarily messengers, as we see in our story that we read this evening.
Scott McKnight, in his translation of the New Testament, the second Testament, calls angels envoys.
John the Baptist is called an angelos by Mark in Mark 1-2 when he quotes Isaiah, behold, I send a messenger.
They fourth tell and they foretell the heralds of things to come and they bring word, they bring God's words from heaven to earth.
If you note the shepherds say, let's go to see this thing that's happened that the Lord has told us about.
So the words they speak are directly from God.
They're also comforters, angels minister to Jesus after his temptations in the desert.
I imagine that maybe they washed him and fed him and comforted him.
Similarly in Luke 22 in the Garden of Gethsemane, Luke reports
that an angel from heaven appears to Jesus to strengthen him in his anguish.
And all four Gospels report that there are angels at the tomb waiting for the women to tell them that Jesus is not there, but he is risen.
Children have guardian angels.
The churches in Revelation have angels.
And Paul says, perhaps surprisingly, in one Corinthians, that we are going to be judging angels.
So angels aren't placed above human creatures in status, even though they dwell in heaven and we dwell here on earth.
In Hebrews, it says, they're ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation.
So in the cosmic structures, humans are made a little lower than angels because we inhabit earth and they inhabit heaven.
But it's only humans that are made in God's image.
And though they're also sometimes called sons of God, they aren't made in God's image.
And even though they can bring revelation from God, they can't reveal the essence of God.
as only Jesus Christ can do that.
And we know also that angels worship God.
They're part of the created worshiping community that surrounds God for eternity.
Rejoice, O heavens, with him and let all God's angels worship him.
Angels dwell in heaven.
They dwell in the presence of God
And then they come from heaven, from the place of eternal worship of God, with messages and revelation and comfort for God's people, their messengers, their revealers, and their mediators, connectors of heaven and earth.
So even though we don't know exactly what they are, we do know what they do.
And we see all of this
in our passage in Luke 2.
The first angel appears with the message, a messenger with a cataclysmic revelation.
Don't fear.
For behold, I bring you good news of great joy, which will be to all the people for today a Savior has been born to you who is Christ the Lord.
The long to for Savior and Messiah.
Today
has been born, and this revelation will be affirmed by a sign that they will find him exactly as the angels said they would.
And at this announcement by the one angel as if to affirm and endorse that this is truly a cataclysmic revelation suddenly.
A great company of the heavenly host, maybe thousands of angels appear.
praising God and saying, glory to God in the highest heaven and on earth, peace to those on whom his favor rests.
The implication being, of course, that it's the shepherds on whom his favor rests.
And so we see an old story coming back to life where God just doesn't choose just one shepherd this time, but chooses a group of shepherds.
to do his bidding.
God's people are coming into a new freedom.
So the heralds come from heaven with good news and then they go back to heaven and the shepherds believe them because they hurry off.
But why angels in the first place?
Why not a prophet?
The prophets have played that role for the people of God.
Or why not just the Holy Spirit?
After all, the Holy Spirit can also speak, bringing words of revelation and comfort.
The truth is that we don't really know, but the fact that God creates these in-between creatures to do what God loves to do on earth, tells us a lot about Him and it tells us a lot about us.
What it says to me is that God loves to connect with His creation in ways that we're able to see and to hear and to understand.
So in fact, He chooses multiple ways to send us messages and to reveal His plans, His purposes and His character to His beloved creatures.
There are so many ways that God speaks
through creation, through the scriptures, through each other in words of teaching, prophecy, wisdom, comfort.
He speaks through feelings and sensations through touch and gaze and expression and imagination and poetry, and we could go on and on.
God knows that we need each other, we need tangible forms of love,
We need creaturely comforts, food and beauty and laughter and tears.
We need to learn to be fully human, to be healed.
And God uses other humans and the whole of his creation to help us learn that in him.
God loves to send messages all the time, and he sends them all the time.
through multiple mediators, revealing more and more of his beautiful self to us in ways that we can receive.
And even though the perfect revelation and the ultimate mediator, Jesus Christ, the image of the invisible God has already come.
And even though the Spirit is the one who makes all these revelations finally accessible to us,
God still uses hundreds of different ways to come and connect heaven and earth.
And in a funny way, it's not then that they're strictly necessary, but it is that they're fitting.
They're fitting for who he is and fitting for who we are as his creatures.
So angels are still around.
I've heard many stories of people who believe they've encountered angels and I believe them.
God loves to connect.
Heaven touches earth.
Do we need to see angels?
Are we missing out if we haven't?
Well, no, not really.
But I see angels performing a role that other creatures don't.
And so I understand why God still sends them and why people still see them.
So in some ways angels are extra, but they bring something that other parts of creation don't.
So what do they do?
First of all, they bring messages from God.
They come with very specific messages that make it really clear that these messages have come from God himself.
They speak God's word to people really directly as we've seen in our story.
So in other words, there isn't really any ambiguity once they've visited.
There's no need for interpretation or questioning or discernment
or clarification, as there often is in other ways in which God communicates through creatures.
Karl Barth has a little section on angels, and he writes that angels belong to God wholly and fully.
They have no autonomy.
They do God's bidding.
And he writes this, where an angel appears and is and speaks and works, God himself appears.
and is and speaks and works.
So there's some kind of direct connection between the sender of the message and the messenger that is actually closer for now than a human anointed connection.
which is why the shepherds received this word as from God himself and Mary does the same, knowing that she's received a word directly from God and submits herself to it.
Secondly, they give glory to God and they sing.
In our passage, it doesn't actually say that the angels sang.
It literally says, they said what they said.
But looking at their proclamation, it isn't surprising that some Bibles translate the word say here as sing.
And I wonder whether we shouldn't opt for sing rather than say, especially as quite a few Bible translations use sing in Revelation 4.8, where the four-winged creatures never stop saying or
singing, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty who was and is and is to come.
Similarly in Revelation 5, which we've already read this evening, we have this amazing, glorious picture of the four living creatures and the elders encircling the lamb upon the throne, the lamb who looks as though it had been slain.
And they pour out their sung worship
to the lamb, they sing a new song.
And then this song escalates and spreads taken up by the angels who join them, thousands and thousands of them.
And the singing grows and spreads and then John hears every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and on the sea and all that is in them joining in as well.
And the text reads, says, but surely
they were singing to him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be praise and honor and glory and power forever and ever.
And in our passage, Charles Wesley thought the angels were singing when he wrote, Hark, the herald angels sing, glory to the newborn King.
So I think the translators of the RSV have made a good call in translating saying as singing.
Let's say they sang.
Let's say the shepherds followed suit and also sang their praise and glory to God on their way home.
What if the angels are there to model how to worship?
eternally singing a song of praise to our Creator that we join in with here and now in anticipation of what's to come, also heralding the coming of God.
The gift of music and song is a powerful gift from God to humanity.
There's a wonderful talk on YouTube by John Lennox
called the Singing Brain, Being Fully Human.
And in it, he talks about the fundamental connection between music and experiencing God, and also the healing properties of music and singing.
You should listen to it if only for the joy of hearing him quoting from C.S.
Lewis' the magician's nephew in his lovely, lilting Northern Irish accent.
when Lewis describes the creation of the whole universe coming from Aslan's powerful singing voice.
Lennox quotes Ian McGilchrist, the principle way in which humanity has felt compelled both to express a sense of and to make contact with the divine is through music.
And in this it seems to me that it has succeeded so immediately and so intubitably that language is scarcely needed.
And Lennox goes on to talk about the natural healing properties of singing.
Singing literally brings health to our bodies.
Corporate singing, especially.
It releases endorphins and oxytocin.
It unites us, relaxes us.
calms our nervous systems.
And it's amazing to me that we sing at all times and in all emotional states.
We sing for joy and we sing to lament.
We sing to grieve.
We sing to protest.
We sing for courage and we sing to celebrate.
We also sing to strengthen one another.
Nick and I had a talk recently with Nati, who is the director of 24-7 prayer in South Africa.
And we were talking about how easily, especially African women, just break into song, in worship services and in prayer times, and just in homes, they will just sing to God together.
And Nati was telling us about how much singing had been a huge part of healing the trauma of post-apartheid South Africa.
But he also added something really deep.
He said to us, you know, singing helps with enduring suffering.
So true.
Music is basic.
The Bible is full of references to music and singing.
The whole creation worships and glorifies God.
The morning stars sing.
The angels shout for joy.
The trees clap their hands.
So angels worship and angels sing.
The glory that they give the sun in heaven, they give him here on earth with us, modeling and connecting us in worship.
to our Creator.
In centuries past, the idea that we were participating in angelic worship when we were singing was just accepted.
People just believed that, that the angels would sing with us and also through us to the world.
And finally, angels come from heaven and they go back to heaven.
It helps to remember that all ancient people thought about the universe in terms of up and down.
I'm not sure we think about the universe so much in those terms anymore, but we still know that the sky is up and the earth is down.
But for ancient people, the universe was a hierarchy with heaven at the top and earth in the middle and Hades or Shil at the bottom.
And people and creatures could traverse this cosmic landscape going up and down from God at the top, and the creatures of darkness and poor unfortunate souls at the bottom.
Angels come from the top, from on high, and they visit below, and then they go back up.
They don't have bodies of their own because they're spirits, but they can take bodily form to communicate with us.
I'm not quite sure how that works, but I think it's important that they come down and then they go back up.
I think it's telling us something.
I know there's a lot of language about heaven being here, isn't there?
Heaven coming to earth.
Heaven touching earth, heaven even possibly invading earth.
But that's not the only picture we get from the Scriptures because there's a movement the other way round.
Heaven is still today another place, a different place and space, and we're going to join them to be taken up as Jesus was taken up when he descended.
and the angels go back to heaven.
Why does that matter?
I think it matters because in one sense, this is not yet our home.
Jesus said to his disciples, don't let your hearts be troubled.
You believe in God, believe also in me.
My father's house has many rooms.
If that were not so, would I have told you that I am going there to prepare a place for you?
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back.
I will come back."
So we wait in Advent to celebrate the first coming of the Son of God as a little baby, but we also have an eye on the second coming.
And because Jesus came the first time as promised, we know He'll come the second time as promised.
I will come back and take you to be with me that you also may be where I am.
You know the way to the place where I'm going.
It's only heaven as another place that makes sense of the earth as it is now with all its suffering and death and decay.
We are not yet there.
It's only heaven as another place, a place where the Son of God in all his glory, in his glorified and yet still scarred human body, surrounded by thousands upon thousands of worshipping angels into seeds for the earth, bringing us in him to the Father now, in anticipation of bringing us and the whole of the creation.
to be with God forever that puts this world in perspective.
Angels come from heaven to bring gifts for God's people, their messengers, revealers, comforters, and worshipers.
They display God's heart to touch His people.
Angels are part of God's panoply of gifts to humanity and of his worshiping, glorifying creation.
But they don't dwell only in creation.
They kind of dwell in between.
They remind us that God loves to come to earth and to speak with his people.
They mediate heavenly worship to us here.
and they sing and make music in the heavenly realms as we sing here on earth.
Angels come and they go, reminding us that one day Jesus will come back and we will follow.
One day this whole heavens and earth will be transformed and renewed.
So what do we do with angels?
Do we need angels?
Well, not really.
Jesus and the spirits are enough to lead us to the Father and to reveal the Godhead to us.
But do angels exist?
Yes.
And do they have a special place in creation?
We know they're here to be part of our connection with God in heaven.
And I do wonder if they're also here to model something for us, to show us how to speak out the good news that comes from God, to proclaim his wonders to the earth, to announce his coming, to teach us how to tell the good news, how to sing, how to glorify God in the heavens and on the earth.
What if angels are here to help us to usher in the dawn of the coming of God?
Giving glory to God isn't only because of what he does among us now, although that is a good reason to give glory to God.
The people of God are called to give glory to God for what he's done, for what he does, for what he will do, and most importantly,
for who he is.
And what starts with the angels in our story is only for a short time and then they hand on to the shepherds.
And the shepherds become the first people, the first human creatures to proclaim in the same way that the angels had proclaimed, with the same words that the angels had taught them, but they become the messengers.
they become the vehicles of God on the earth.
Angels exist not for their own sakes, but truly for God's sake, part of his great plan for beauty, truth and goodness to be spread abroad in the earth.
And if that's true, we certainly wouldn't focus on angels or on an angel as a thing in its own right because they're only creatures like us and because they exist to point to God.
We wouldn't elevate them or worship them or even perhaps dwell on them in our thinking because they're creatures just like us.
we wouldn't even long to see them because they long for us to see God.
But we would accept, I think, that at times and in places and for specific reasons, God might choose suddenly to send an angel or perhaps thousands and thousands of angels to us here to keep connecting
what goes on in heaven to what goes on here on earth.
I'm just going to finish by reading to you something by Walter Bruggeman in a little devotional for Advent that I picked up a couple of days ago on our passage.
On this sixth day of Christmas, we remember that the angels showed up for work on the first no owl.
God dispatched them specifically to Bethlehem and out of the way village south of Jerusalem to proclaim God's glory.
They wondered about that, better to bring the message to Jerusalem or Damascus or Tyre or Nineveh, but they obeyed.
Then the Holy One added to the message, declare peace on earth for all humanity.
They obeyed
went to Bethlehem and filled the sky with song.
Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth, good will to humanity.
Along with the shepherds, we hear this song.
It's partly a declaration, there will be and is glory in heaven and peace on earth.
But it's also a summons, a call to praise God and do peace.
Do praise with your tongue, do peace with your feet.
We give you thanks for such good angelic words among us.
Amen.
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.